NLP(Natural Language Processing)
Natural language processing is a subfield of  linguistic, Artificial intelligence, & Computer Science  concerned with interaction between human and computer (machine ).so that we can interact with machines as we communicate with ourselves .

NATURAL LANGUAGE:
A natural language or ordinary language is the language which is evolved in human being naturally due to its continuous usage and repetition without any premeditation or planning .
It is different from constructed language  which is used for coding and study logics .

FACTORS EFFECTING THE GROWTH OF NLP:
LANGUAGE AND COMMUNICATION - By this we communicated and  shared our learning to others and continued our growth in future
INCREASED INDUSTRIALIZTION- due to this we brought machine in almost every field and made the human effort much easier.
MAKING MACHINES LEARN NATURAL LANGUAGE- This factor is still not evolved so much but we have started building towards this direction where we can communicate with machine in our natural language .

REAL WORLD APPLICATIONS:
Contextual advertisement
Email clients- spam filtering and smart reply
Social media  - filtering adult content , opinion mining
search engines -   like if you want to know capital of Sri Lanka then you need not to go inside any website ,google fetch that information and provide you instantly.
Chatbots



COMMON NLP TASKS:
Text/document classification - it this you classify your text into different sections like news is divided into sports, political, international etc
sentiment analysis -  it generally sees your reviews online and predict the reaction on your product .
Information retrieval- it takes out the informative data or entity that is important from the big datasets.
Parts of speech tagging -  when we are building chatbots it is necessary to make it clear what is users context so we divide the sentence into different parts of speech to take out better context.
Language detection and machine translation: -  it is used for language translations services
Conversational agents: - chating ai agents
knowledge graph and QA systems- if you have a big dataset you can break them entities  and make a knowledge graph . google have the largest knowledge graph .
Text summarization - it summarizes the big text into some few lines
Text Generations- it generates text for you in the topic specified
Spell checking in grammar correction
Speech to text

HEURISTIC APPROACH
REGULAR EXPRESSIONS:
It is way of finding some type of text pattern in another text like you have scrapped a information from web-services and it contain html tags which you do not want so you use Regular expression  to remove those tags and take the informative text.

WORDNET:
Wordnet is lexical dictionary in which you store relations of a word with another word in an organised way.

OPEN MIND COMMONSENCE:
It stores that factual data  and was open source  so anyone can append any factual data to this dataset.

Advantages of this approach was that it was very quick & chances of its failure was low  because you have manually created rules from humans


MACHINE LEARNING MODELS :
Its advantage  over heuristic approach was that: In Heuristic approach you make rules manually but there are some open ended problems in which it is impossible to make rules so at that point Machine learning approach came into use where rules are built internally by the algorithms and input /output sequence is determined by the datasets.

ALGORITHMS USED :
Naive Bayes
Logistic regression
SVM
LDA
Hidden Markov models


DEEP LEARNING MODELS:
Its advantages over machine learning was that:  it was able to retain the sequence of the text  while the machine learning model do not care about the sequence of the text as it just covert words into numbers .
And second is that deep learning makes feature reasoning itself while in machine learning we have to create them.

ALGORITHIMS USED :
RNN(Recurrent neural Network)
LSTD(Long short term definition)
CNN
TRANSFORMAERS
AUTOENCODERS


NLP PIPELINE
NLP pipeline is a series of steps followed to build a complete NLP software.

Series of steps in NLP pipeline are as follows:
Data acquisition -  collecting data even when you are working with heuristic approach. Without dataset NLP pipeline is impossible.
Text Preparation  
Text clearing - here we process data to remove basic grammatical mistakes ,  spelling errors ,removing emojis etc
Basic preprocessing -  in this sub-step we do basic preprocessing such as tokenization,  Stop words , punctuations  etc
Advanced preprocessing - in this we do advanced preprocessing such as chucking , parts of speech tagging etc
feature engineering- when we are implementing deep learning and machine learning models we need the data to be in correct format. like bag of words .
Modelling
Model building-  this is the step where you actually apply algorithms in the datasets .
Evaluating - in this step you evaluate your model from different models based on their accuracy and select the best model.
Deployment
 	Deployment -in this you deploy your software to a cloud based services  .
 	Monitoring -  you continuously monitor the software running in the cloud based services for any kind of error correction.
 	Updating Model - in future it may happen that you have to update the model to its more advanced version.



STEMMING: it involve converting the words into its root or base form .
running ->run
troubled->trouble


LEMMATIZATION: it is the more refined form of  STEMMING as stemming only cut of the extra part of the words whereas it reduces the word to its dictionary base form.
 running->run,
mice->mouse,
better->good


FACES OF NLP:
lexical analysis :
Removal of stop words, stemming, lemmatization
syntax analysis:
Structure of grammar , pos tagging
semantic analysis:
meaning of the context ,
discourse analysis:
find the relation of the context of the word
fragmetic analysis:
* *	converting words to vectors for using it furthur


TOKENIZATION:
tokenization is the process of breaking text into smaller units called tokens.
tokens can be sentences words and sub-words .
Example: NLP is fun
tokens: 'NLP', 'is', 'fun'.

Disadvantages:
Meaning of text may change .
Punctuations may be interpreted.

Sentence Tokenization
Definition: Divides text into individual sentences.
Example:
Text: I love AI. It is very interesting.
Output:
["I love AI.", "It is very interesting."]

Word Tokenization
Definition: Splits text into individual words.
Example:
Text: I love AI
Output:
["I", "love", "AI"]

Whitespace Tokenization
Definition: Splits text using spaces, tabs, or newlines.
Example:
Text: I love AI
Output:
["I", "love", "AI"]

Treebank Tokenization
Definition: Tokenizes text using linguistic rules for punctuation and contractions.
Example:
Text: I don't like NLP.
Output:
["I", "do", "n't", "like", "NLP", "."]

Regular Expression Tokenization
Definition: Uses patterns to define how tokens are extracted.
Example:
Text: Email me at test@gmail.com
Regex Pattern: \w+
Output:
["Email", "me", "at", "test", "gmail", "com"]

Tweet Tokenization
Definition: Tokenizes social media text while preserving hashtags, mentions, and URLs.
Example:
Text: Loving #AI! Follow me @OpenAI
Output:
["Loving", "#AI", "!", "Follow", "me", "@OpenAI"]




STEMMING:
It involve converting the words into its root or base form .
running ->run
troubled->trouble

POTTER STEMMER - It is one of the oldest and one of the most widely used , it applies rule based approach the removes common suffix in multimodal steps. It is developed by the Martin Potter.
Advantages:
It is fast and simple and widely supported.
Disadvantages:
Produces non meaning full words

2. SNOWBALL STEMMER - snowball stemmer also known as potter 2 stemmer is an improved version of Potter stemmer.
 	1)  It is more accurate , consistent , language flexible
 	2)  Support many languages.
	working:
	i)  similar rule based approach
	ii) clear stem compared to porter
	Advantages:
	i) support multilingual support and is more maintainable







LEMMATIZATION:
lemmatization reduces to their base or their dictionary form (LEMMA) by considering
vocabulary
morphology
part of speech
and the output of lemmatization is always a valid words.

WORDNET LEMMATIZER:- a lexical database of English to find the correct lemma.




VECTORIZTION is the process of converting text into normal vectors or number is known as vectorization.
ONE HOT ENCODING:
One hot encoding is word as a vector where only one position is 1 and all others are zero

BAG OF WORDS:
Bag of words represent text as a vector of word frequencies ignoring grammar and word order.